# Project 38: Wine (Ontology) Tasting: testing technicality in practicality for the food industry

## Abstract

Machine learning in high-variability areas, such as food and nutrition, is a very complex problem. Data mining with machine learning is an urgency for the study of dietary intolerance and allergies, especially when accurate labeling is required by laws. Large-scale databasing also introduces demands for structuring information of manufacturer’s data. Lack of semantic implementation to structure food data is a resolvable challenge that can be overcome by using existing technologies equipped with knowledge dissemination. Once accomplished, the structured data can aid the food-science research and food-manufacturing advanced databasing. As use cases emerge in the industry domain and food allergy studies to exploit ontologies such as [the Wine Ontology in data classification](https://github.com/UCDavisLibrary/wine-ontology/issues/4), an exploration of semantics capability of related ontologies including the Wine Ontology, and Food Ontology (FoodOn) is proposed as a proof-of-concept in this BioHackathon topic. The plan for this topic is as follows.

1. Technical tutorial to examine the two existing wine ontologies for reuse in the aspect of practicality:
   1. [Ontology building process: The wine domain](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/253758073_Ontology_building_process_The_wine_domain)
   1. [UC Davis Library: Wine Ontology](https://github.com/UCDavisLibrary/wine-ontology)
1. Wine tasting session(s) with an invited local wine connoisseur and a Q&A session to record the findings from a human expert. How is a wine taste profile described? What information is recorded in a wine description generated by a human wine expert? Can the ontologies be used to classify knowledge indicated by such description?
1. Application testing:
   1. Curating a small donated test dataset from [a wine merchant](https://www.ribox.co.uk/shop) with ontology mapping to be used for advanced query building
   1. Alignment of design patterns from the examined wine ontologies for importing into [Food Ontology](https://foodon.org/)

This proposal aims to reuse existing interoperable resources. The proof-of-concept in this study can be extended to cover the other areas of food science such as cultures for fermented products, and the associated food allergy studies. This is of high relevance to the emerging ELIXIR Food & Nutrition Community, and its industry partners. Participants of this topic are projected to include the ontology expert topic leads, and any members who are interested in learning ontologies through hands-on tutorial exploring the wine ontologies. Potentially, there may also be interest from [INCAVI, the Catalan Institute of Vines and Wines](http://www.ceics.eu/web/ceics/incavi) from the Catalan Ministry of Agriculture to participate at the event. Preliminary outcome is expected to conclude within the 4-day period of the 2020 EU-BioHackathon event. This includes

1. A summary of findings - Pros & Cons of each wine ontology examined and their capability of data integration and interoperability.
1. The test dataset that is curated and mapped to existing wine ontology (-ies) with a follow-up plan of technical implementation at the wine merchant’s database.
1. A report of interoperability between the wine ontologies and Food Ontology for reuse of FoodOn as an application ontology in the practice. 




## Topics

Data Platform
 industry
 Interoperability Platform
 Training Platform

**Project Number:** 38



**EasyChair Number:** 4

## Team

### Lead(s)

Sirarat Sarntivijai, sirarat.sarntivijai@elixir-europe.org
 Jane Lomax, jane@scibite.com
 Damion Dooley, Damion.Dooley@bccdc.ca
 Joan Marc Reira, marc@ribox.co.uk

### Nominated participant(s)

- local wine expert (to be named)

## Expected outcomes

1) A summary of findings - Pros & Cons of each wine ontology examined and their capability of data integration and interoperability.
 2) The test dataset that is curated and mapped to existing wine ontology (-ies) with a follow-up plan of technical implementation at the wine merchant’s database.
 3) A report of interoperability between the wine ontologies and Food Ontology for reuse of FoodOn as an application ontology in the practice.

## Expected audience

- members learning database curation by ontologies
 - building application ontologies

**Number of expected hacking days**: 2-4

