# Project 11: bio.tools integration and sustainable development

## Abstract

bio.tools is an ELIXIR Tools Platform service which provides a discovery portal for bioinformatics software information. We will host discussion and hacking sessions on one or more of the following: 
Design a future smart registration interface which leverages EDAM and EDAMmap (https://github.com/edamontology/edammap) to facilitate tool description creation and improve the user experience at registration time. This may include the following aspects: 

- user supplies a tool-related publication ID, i.e. DOI, PMID or PMCID (or possibly some other relevant text or website), EDAMmap is invoked to fetch and parse preliminary information and retrieve candidate EDAM concepts.
- use of defined EDAM conceptual relationships, e.g. once operations are suggested by the system and confirmed by the user, possible input and output datatypes can be suggested. Once input and output types are confirmed, supported data formats can be suggested.
- wizard interface for guided registration and/ or power-user console exposing all the functionality.
- wireframing of the UI and/or standalone Angular 2+ app of EDAMmap working with bio.tools entries, with the aim of integrating the functionality into the main bio.tools codebase.

Explore how EDAM can be better used to provide more meaningful search results in the bio.tools search interface. This may include the following aspects:
- index the entire EDAM term information (i.e. term name, synonyms, definition etc.)
- options to search over indexed terms and synonyms of descendant and ancestor concepts, based on the supplied search term.
- exposing some EDAM context based on the supplied search term, and providing facilities for the user to select additional search terms, either more specific or more general

Discuss and test the implications of automatic generated entries in bio.tools, e.g. entries generated by Pub2Tools (https://github.com/bio-tools/pub2tools) from scientific articles.
- analyse, evaluate and optimise Pub2Tools-generated entries
- explore the option of using textual diff to compare auto-generated entries with subsequent versions of those entries which have been manually corrected - providing insight into the performance of Pub2Tools and how it can be improved
- discuss what is the best approach of displaying Pub2Tools-generated entries in bio.tools and their impact on the total number of bio.tools entries
- discuss the approach of identifying the owners/authors of the Pub2Tools-generated entries

Improvements on tooling for bio.tools data in the context of the ELIXIR Tools Platform Ecosystem

Explore and evaluate approaches of identifying “similar” entries in bio.tools. Two bio.tools entries are “similar” if they provide related functionality. A tool card in bio.tools will have a section of similar entries which can be browsed by users.

## Topics

Machine learning
 Tools Platform

**Project Number:** 11



**EasyChair Number:** 18

## Team

### Lead(s)

Hans Ienasescu (hans@bio.tools) (corresponding author-author1)
 Erik Jaaniso (erik.jaaniso@ut.ee)
 Jon Ison (jon.c.ison@gmail.com)

### Nominated participant(s)

Hans Ienasescu (hans@bio.tools)
 Erik Jaaniso (erik.jaaniso@ut.ee)

## Expected outcomes

One or more of the following:
 - Design of future smart bio.tools registration interface leveraging EDAM and EDAMmap
 - Technical plan for better use of EDAM for bio.tools search
 - Optimised methods for auto-generation of bio.tools content
 - CI improvements for bio.tools data around the ELIXIR Tools Platform Ecosystem
 - Technical scoping of methods to render similar tools in bio.tools

## Expected audience

Angular 2+ programmers
 Python programmers
 Text mining experts
 Ontology experts
 Elasticsearch experts
 Data science experts

**Number of expected hacking days**: 4

